---
layout: post
title:  "Thoughts on Divinity: Original Sin 2"
categories: games
published: false
---

**RED ALERT**: I'm going to spoil major plot points of Divinity: Original Sin 2 - Definitive Edition


DoS2 is in many senses a great game, a passion-filled co-op RPG with overwhelmingly positive reviews on Steam. Playing through the game made me feel many things, unfortunately one of the things it made me feel is "this is really not my thing".

I just need some way to express how I felt about the story, like a self-exorcism. Get it all out there. 

The main theme will be that I think a lot of the story elements are too silly for my taste, aren't connected to the gameplay in meaningful ways, and overall capture the feeling of going to a stranger's Dungeon and Dragons game. 


## The Evidence

### Playing an Undead Doesn't Matter

Looking at my options for character creation half of them are undead versions of the base races, which already seems to weight the importance of that option. Reading the description it says that 

> The Undead are an abhorred race in Rivellon, considered abominations of the natural order. Those who wish to walk among the living must mask themselves or risk provoking violence.

along with noting that you have immunity to DEATHFOG and cannot benefit from healing. Later in the introductory mission as the ship you are on sinks one of the undead characters, Fane, calmly explains his plan to go down with the ship as he reads his book in a closet, then walk to shore later. This establishes two things

- being an undead has significant impact culturally and with how you relate to the setting
- your undead physiology fundamentally changes how you experience the world

DoS2 then proceeds to do neither of these. The main inciting incident of the whole game is being saved by divine forces from "drowning" as the ship sinks, despite having not 30 seconds earlier established that this isn't a threat. Also I discovered that having to conceal my true nature in an unwelcoming world just means wearing any headgear and having access to generally meaningless voice lines.

Despite this also as soon as combat breaks out my impenetrable disguise doesn't stop enemies from throwing healing spells my way. Or early on when Sebille holds a knife to your throat there are some odd sounding lines where it instead describes her threatening your bones with a needle? Or how pretty consistently many NPCs seem to figure out your true nature in dialogue and then just make oblique references to how they don't care. 

### Moral Ambiguity

DoS2 has a long distance relationship with the concept of "moral ambiguity." Most everyone you meet is either sarcastically evil, blatantly evil, banally evil, or unwittingly a dick. Our introduction to the Magisters has them evaporating one of their own for treachery, and later you meet one, High Judge Orivand, in full Skeletor levels of glee as he rips the free will from Sourcerers. However the game then goes on to have plenty of lore about how bad the other side is, or that not all Magisters are like that.


To me this reads less like a story with moral complexity and more like one where the motivations aren't well established. See "suggestions" below for how I think Fort Joy could have gone.

### Whiplash

If you open up the map you can see how the world is divided into distinct color-coded zones which you can wander through, and the story reflects this. I understand how writing a dynamic world can be expensive and time consuming, but DoS2 seems to be trapped in stasis. 


At the start you can essentially wipe out everyone, Sourcerers and Magisters, in Fort Joy, but nothing ever really changes. The story seems to imply that you're trapped on a dangerous island and need to find a way out, but as soon as the "story" has had its turn gameplay shows up to turn essentially everything into a dungeon. 


Similarly the beginning of Act 2 opens with being saved by the Mary Sue demon, and a startling scene of dead animals as evil forces from beyond are eroding the world. Caravans wrecked, animals begging to die, however twenty meters up the road is a town doing pretty much fine. Oh sure they're selling poisoned fish, but no one seems all that concerned. That and having maybe 2 Magisters for every citizen seems to really reinforce that the town is a potential encounter, not a lived-in place. 

### The Squirrel

This is of course purely a question of taste. Some might describe the conflicted demon-lady or talking squirrel knight as "charming" or "fun" or "insufferable." Really depends on you, but it does perfectly capture the feeling of wandering in to a stranger's Dungeons and Dragons game with a DM that everyone else adores.

### General disconnects

Overall I think many of the disconnects in the story are due to a fixation on having "options" and replayability. To me it seems that a lot of players enjoy knowing that events could have played out a different way, that the counterfactual is as equally important as the story themselves. 


## Suggestions

fort joy rewrite
have an actual backstory opening

### A Caveat

good reviews
apeals to certain type of storytelling